The main difference between Java and any other programming language is the unique method in which Java code is executed. Unlike compiled languages such as C++, Java is compiled into bytecode which can run on any device with the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). C++, on the other hand, is compiled directly into machine code and therefore, can only run on the same platform in which it was compiled.
Another unique feature is the enormous Java Class Library (JCL). That said, to answer this question thoroughly, Java must be compared to each language specifically. In the next section, Java is compared to six of the other major programming languages that are widely used today. This includes C, C#, C++, Javascript, Ruby, and Python.
Java vs C (Very Different)
Java is platform-independent. C is platform-dependent.
Java is an object-oriented programming (OOP) language. C is procedural.
Java follows the bottom-up approach. C follows the top-down approach.
Java has automatic memory management. C has manual memory management.
C uses pointers. Java does not.
Java has built-in thread support. C does not.
Java vs C# (Very Similar)
Java and C# are both OOP languages.
Java is platform-independent. C# is platform-dependent.
Java is used for developing web applications and games.
C# is used for game and mobile development.
Java vs C++ (Some Similarites)
Java is derived from C++.
Java is compiled to bytecode (platform-independent). C++ is compiled to machine code.
Java is object-oriented. C++ is both object-oriented and procedural.
Java has automatic garbage collection. C++ does not.
Java doesn’t support operator overloading. C++ does.
Java doesn’t support structures and unions. C++ does.
Java is slower than C++ on execution.
Java is easier to use and simpler than C++.
Java has a powerful cross-platform library. C++ libraries are robust but simple.
Java vs Javascript (Very Different)
Java is a programming language. Javascript is a scripting language.
Java and Javascript are both object-oriented programming (OOP) languages.
Java runs on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). Javascript runs on web browsers.
Java is compiled and interpreted. Javascript is interpreted.
Java requires more memory than Javascript.
Java vs Python (Some Similarities)
Java and Python are both object-oriented programming (OOP) languages.
Java is essentially a compiled language. Python is an interpreted language.
Java and Python are both general-purpose programming languages.
Java is harder to use than Python.
Java requires more lines of code than Python for an equivalent program.
Java and Python are both among the most popular programming languages, even today.
Java is faster than Python on execution.
Java vs Ruby (Very Similar)
Java and Ruby are both object-oriented programming (OOP) languages.
Java and Ruby are both general-purpose programming languages.
Java is a static programming language. Ruby is dynamic.
Java and Ruby are both platform-independent.
Java and Ruby both provide inheritance.
Java requires more lines of code than Ruby for an equivalent program.
Java is faster than Ruby.
Java and Ruby can be used together and supplement each other.
